>> Can a sugar pill help you
feel better even when you know
it's a placebo?
Groundbreaking new studies
indicate just that.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A placebo is defined as an
inert preparation prescribed
more for the mental
relief of the patient
than for its actual
effect on a disorder.
It has been used in most
modern clinical studies
to measure the effects
of a drug against what
has been deemed no treatment.
However, starting in
the 1950s, researchers
started to see the power of the
placebo in healing the body.
And today, cutting edge
science is showing just how.
Former organic
chemist David Hamilton
has been researching the
placebo effect for years.
He wrote about it
in his book, "How
Your Mind Can Heal Your Body."
>> Scientists have done quite a
lot of work on how the placebo
effect works.
When you receive a
placebo, your brain
produces the substances
that it needs
to produce to deliver what you
believe is supposed to happen.
If someone is given
a placebo for pain,
but they believe
it's an actual drug,
then it's almost that there's a
little pharmacist in the brain
who says, OK, they
believe that they're going
to get a reduction in pain.
So how do I meet
that expectation?
So the little pharmacist
in the brain said, OK,
how do we replicate that?
Oh, well we use our
own painkillers.
They're called
endogenous opiates.
Because a lot of people think
that it's just all in the mind,
placebo effect, but it's not.
There's an actual chemical
change in the brain.
So in other words,
the brain produces
what it needs to
produce to deliver
what the person believes
is supposed to happen.
>> Dr. Joe Dispenza is a leader
in the field of mind body
medicine and author
of the bestseller,
"You Are the Placebo."
He believes the
placebo effect is
a true testament of the power
of the mind to impact the body.
>> That pill represents
a symbol of hope,
a symbol of possibility.
And when the person begins
to associate that pill
with the thought
of being better,
they're selecting a new
future subconsciously.
They're not even aware
that they're doing that.
And if they begin to
combine that clear intention
with an elevated
emotion, they're
changing their state of being.
And when they change
their state of being,
they're changing the
way they think and feel.
And in a sense now, they're
moving their biology
from the past
present reality into
the future present reality.
>> Numerous studies, which
have dramatically ramped up
in recent years, suggest just
how powerful the placebo effect
can be, especially in pain
and mental health conditions.
In one remarkable
study, researchers
found that a placebo
worked just as well
as a pharmaceutical for
reduction of some Parkinson's
symptoms when over the
course of several days,
the drug was swapped
out for the placebo.
>> On day five, the scientists
could swap the drug altogether
for a placebo.
And the placebo was just as
potent as the actual drug.
In fact, in the scientific
paper the scientist
actually said that the placebo
matched the drug in terms
of its clinical effectiveness.
In other words, people
who got a placebo
got exactly the same reduction
in tremors, muscle stiffness,
and activation of
neurons in the brain
as those who actually got
a full dose of the drug.
>> Most research on the placebo
effect has thus far focused
on conditions in which the
symptoms are subjective
to the patient's perception.
And in these
studies, the placebo
has been shown to
relieve those symptoms.
>> So in studies placebo
effects tend to be seen mostly
in things like pain,
anxiety, fatigue, depression,
even Parkinson's disease.
Generally speaking,
placebo effect and studies
are more observable
for subjective things.
And what I mean by
that is stuff that
is processed through
brain chemistry.
>> In double blind placebo
studies patients are not told
whether they are receiving
a drug or placebo.
Dr. Ted Kaptchuk of
Harvard Medical School
was uncomfortable with
the ethics of this
and over the last decade has
been giving people placebos
openly.
And remarkably,
study after study
has shown that even when
people know they are receiving
a placebo they feel better.
In his most recent study,
Kaptchuk and his colleagues
compared the results
of these open label
placebos to double blind
placebos in treating
the symptoms of
irritable bowel syndrome
and found that both
were equally effective.
Just how does this work?
>> Open label placebos work
for a couple of reasons.
But the first way
is in these studies
people are educated a little
bit about the placebo effect.
So they're told a
little bit that there's
a mind-body connection.
And also told that
these are placebos,
but some people
are known to have
an improvement in their symptoms
due to a mind-body connection.
So what that immediately
does is see some degree of I
expect perhaps something
could happen from this.
>> The other reason why the open
label placebo works may be even
stronger.
>> So we've had a lifetime
of experience of say,
when I take these two
tablets, open the bottle,
take them with some water,
the following thing happens.
Either my pain goes away or
my symptoms are relieved.
And then people
have had decades--
hundreds if not thousands
of experiences of that.
So that wires into
our brain networks.
The weight of that ingrained
psychological association
for most people is far stronger
than your present moment
observation that this
is just a placebo.
>> The broader implications
of placebo research are quite
significant.
>> There's more potential
in the placebo effect.
I think we need to expand our
perception of what the placebo
effect is.
And if we could expand it
into more about the mind-body
connection, I think it's
possible to tap into deeper
systems of the body, not
necessarily through a blind
placebo being given--
some people get a drug.
Some people get a placebo--
but in some kind of way of
training neural networks
or training the immune system.
These kind of
things are possible.
>> More studies on placebo are
forthcoming and are expected
to continue to highlight our
remarkable powers of thought
and innate capacities to heal.
And perhaps one day the
placebo may actually
become the treatment.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]